# Energy Conserving Semi-Implicit Particle-in-Cell (ECSIM)

This software follows the algorithm published by G. Lapenta in [Journal of
Computational Physics 334 (2017)
349â€“366](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2017.01.002) and was implemented
under NSF award NSF-2031024.

## Version of the Code

Currently three versions of the code are implemented in python:

1. 1d1v phase space, only solving for $E_{x}$. $B_{x}$ is required to be
   homogeneous due to the divergence constraint. It will remain unchanged in
   time since there is no currents $j_{y}$ and $j_{z}$ and it would only modify
   $v_{y}$ and $v_{z}$ and can hence be completely removed from the code.

2. 1d1v phase space, but retaining both $E_{x}$ and $B_{x}$. $B_{x}$ of course
   still needs to remain homogeneous and static, but we can check if the
   Maxwell solver (the most complicated part of the algorithm) reproduces it,
   instead of enforcing it be construction.

3. 1d3v phase space, retaining all six components of the electromagnetic field.
   Thermal fluctuations in $v_{y}$ and $v_{z}$ will produce transverse current
   and hence transverse fields, but none of these fluctuations should have a
   strong impact on the electrostatic instability. Late term behaviour might be
   changed due to particles scattering of magnetic field fluctuations.

All three version of the code make use of [Numpy](https://numpy.org/) and
[Numba](https://numba.pydata.org/) to improve the run time and use
[GMRES](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.sparse.linalg.gmres.html)
from [Scipy](https://scipy.org/) to solve the linear system of equations that
gives the electromagnetic fields at the next timestep.

## Test Problems

The following test problems are currently implemented and are supplied with
simple scripts that run the code and produce plots:

### Twostream instability

Two counter-streaming electron populations are set up. The diagnostic plots
include the growth rate of the electrostatic twostream instability,
conservation of total energy, evolution of particle momentum and implied
effective numerical collision frequency.

### Weibel instability

Two counter-streaming electron populations are set up. Since the drift speed is
in a direction perpendicular to the resolved dimension, only the 1d3v code can
simulate this instability. The diagnostic plots include the growth rate of the
electromagnetic Weibel instability and conservation of total energy.

### Finite grid instability

Show the absencse of the finite grid instability even when increasingly
underresolving the Debye length. Conservation of total energy and absence of
self-heating is shown. Fluctuations in kinetic and electric energy _decrease_
with larger cells and numerical collisionality drops.

### Plasma Wave Modes

This test follows the approach suggested in [Journal of Plasma Physics, 83(1),
707830101](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022377817000149). Eigenmodes in thermal
plasma under severeal different conditions are extract by online Fourier
transformation of the fields at run time and are compared to analytic
expectations from cold plasma theory.
